# 4. Introduction to PEDAC process
The PEDAC process is one approach to solving programming problems.  Its primary goal is to help me identify and avoid pitfalls that I may encounter when I don't code with intent.

P - Understand the **P**roblem
E - **E**xamples/Test cases
D - **D**ata structure
A - **A**lgorithm
C - **C**ode

This guide describes a "lighter" version of the PEDAC process that should help me prepare for the upcoming interview assessment.  We'll discuss PEDAC in much more detail in a later course.

When given a programming problem, students often jump straight to the coding part.  At first glance, this approach seems reasonable. In an interview setting with limited time, I want to solve the problem quickly. Writing an algorithm may seem like an unnecessary use of my limite time, especially when the problem seems simple.  However, in this guide, we want to show that following the PEDAC process saves time and lets me solve **complex** problems efficiently. 

Note that we've bolded the word "complex". Some problems, like, writing a method that takes a string and returns its uppercased version are so simple that they don't need a detailed algroithm.  However, writign a method that returns all the substrings from a given string that are palindromes is not simple, and following the PEDAC process is crucial to solving the problem in the time allotted.

In this guide, we will focus on the "understand the problem" and "data structure/algorith" steps of the PEDAC process.  We won't spend much time talking about the Examples/Test Cases step since we will provide test cases during the first interview assessment.  We also won't spend much time on the Code: most students have sufficient knowledge of Ruby syntax, functions and methods to solve even the hardest problems.  Where they run into trouble is understanding the problem and determining an appropriate algorithm. 

### P - [Understand the] **P**roblem
Understanding the problem has three steps.

1. Read the problem description.
2. Check the test cases, if any.
3. If any part of the problem is unclear, ask the interviewer or problem requester to clarify the matter.

Let's walk through this process for the problem given below:
```Ruby
# PROBLEM:

# Given a string, write a method change_me which returns the same string but with all the words in it that are palindromes uppercase

# change_me("We will meet at noon") == "We will meet at NOON"
# change_me("No palindromes here") == "No palindromes here"
# change_me("") == ""
# change_me("I LOVE my mom and dad equally") == "I LOVE my MOM and DAD equally"
```

After reading this problem, some items may need clarification:

1. **What is a palindrome?** You might ask the interviewer to tell you what a palindrome is, and the interviewer would tell you that it is a word that reads the same forwards and backward.
2. **Should the words in the string remain the same if they already use uppercase?** Here, you can check the test cases. In the fourth test case, the word `LOVE` already uses uppercase, and it remains uppercase in the solution.
3. **How should I deal with empty strings provided as input?** The test cases frequently answer this question. In this case, test case number 3 provides the answer. This is an implicit requirement that we can infer from the test cases.
4. **Can I assume that all inputs are strings?** Test cases don't show any non-string inputs, so I should ask whether the inputs can contain non-string values, and what I should do with them. In this problem, we won't worry about non-string values.
5. **Should I consider letter case when deciding whether a word is a palindrome?** Again, test cases don't show any appropriate examples. The interviewer might tell me that the palindrome words should be case sensitive: `'mom'` is a palindrome, `'Mom'` is not.
6. **Do I need to return the same string object or an entirely new string?** This question is one of the most important and most overlooked that I can ask. Typically, while solving problems, students make certain assumptions. One assumption might be that they need to return the same string object.  Students often start solving the problem without checking whether the assumption is correct.  For this reason, the student might end up losing 10-15 minutes struggling with the wrong problem. In this problem, I should return an entirely new string.
7. **Always verify my assumptions either by looking at the test cases or by asking the interviewer.** Some assumptions, like whether we should treat strings as case-sensitive or not, can be verified by either looking at the problem description, if that is mentioned there, or by chekcing the test cases. If I can't determine the answer with the test cases or problem description, I should ask the interviewer to clarify this for me.

To conclude this part of the PEDAC process, I need to write down what the inputs and outputs for the problem are. I should also describe the rules that I must follow.  The rules should encapsulate all the explicit and implicit requirements in the problem. So, I should identify what the explicit requirements are, write them down, and then repeat the process for the implicit requirements:

```Ruby
# input: string
# output: string (not the same object)
# rules:
	#Explicit requirements:
	# - every palindrome in the string must be converted to uppercase. (Reminder: a palindrome is a word that reads the same forward and backward).
	# - Palindromes are case sensitive("Dad" is not a palindrome, but "dad" is.)
	# Implicit requirements:
	# - the returned string shouldn't be the same string object.
	# - If the string is an empty string, the result should be an empty string.
```

### Data Structure/Algorithm
Data structures influence my algorithm, and for that reason, these two steps are often paired.  Deciding what data structure to use is generally easy for students: use cases for array and objects, for instance, are generally easy to identify.  However, designing the right algorithm if far more challenging.  The biggest problem that students have when writing algorithms is providing sufficient detail. 

Let's consider another problem. Try to work through the "understand the problem" part of this problem on my own, and write the input, output, and rules for it.  

```Ruby
# PROBLEM:

# Given a string, write a method 'palindrome_substrings' which returns all the substrings from a given string which are palindromes. Consider palindrome words case sensitive.

# input: string
# output: array of substrings
# rules: 
	# Explicit requirements:
		# - return only substrings which are palindromes
		# - palindrome words should be case sensitive, meaning "abBA" is not a palindrome.

# Questions: 
# - What is a substring?
# - What is a palindrome?
# - Will inputs always be strings?
# What does it mean to treat palindrome words case-sensitively?

# Data structure: string method to break down string, shovel operator into array to be stored

# Test cases:

# palindrome_stubstrings("supercalifragilisticexpeidalidocious") == ["ili"]
# palindrome_substrings("abcddcbA") == ["bcddcb", "cddc", "dd"]
# palindrome_substrings("paindrome" == []
# palindrome_substrings ("") == []

# Algorithm:
	# - initialize a result variable to an empty array
	# - create an array named substring_arr that contains all of the substrings of the input string that are at least 2 characters long.
	# - loop through the words in the substring_arr array.
	# - if the word is a palindrome, append it to the result array
	# - return the result array
```

Does this algorithm look complete?

This algorithm is a "high-level" algorithm and it resembles those that we often see students write during interviews.  It looks complete, but let's think about it for a moment: what is the hardest part of this problem? Is it looping through an array and pushing substrings that are palindromes in the result array?  Is it determining whether a substring is a palindrome? Is it something else entirely?

Determining whether a word is a palindrome isn't that difficult for most students.  Looping through an array and selecting all the palindromes is relatively easy as well.  However, finding all the substrings for a given string can be challenging.  The above algorithm doesn't tackle that issue. It lacks implementation details for the "hard" parts.

When a student starts writing code based on this algorithm, she soon realizes that returning all the substrings won't be easy. Ideally, the student should return to the algorithm and try to come up with a way to find all the substrings from the input string. She might also create a new method named `substrings` that returns the array of substrings. In practice, though, the time limitations often lead her to take a hack & slash approach instead.  That almost always leads to spending more time than necessary on the problem or, worse yet, not solving it at all.

Let's now follow the correct approach. The student can use the "high-level" algorithm from aboce and first write the code for it. The code might look like this:

```Ruby
def palindrome_substrings(str)
	result = []
	substrings_arr = substrings(str)
	substrings_arr.each do |substring|
		result << substring if is_palindrome?(substring)
	end
	result
end
```

Note that we are calling methods named `substrings` and `is_palindrome?`. We haven't defined those methods yet. Instead of trying to write the code for these methods, let's return to the algorithm and determine how they need to work. Let's see how that might look; we'll tackle the `substrings` method first.

To find a correct algorithm, I can simplify the problem by using a small, concrete example to determine what we need to do. For instance, I can start with a short word like `halo` and write all its substrings that are at least 2 characters in length. The resulting list is `['ha', 'hal', 'halo', 'al', 'alo', 'lo']`. I see a pattern here that is some sort of complex looping.

The first loop - the outermost loop - iterates over the starting index for the substrings. With `halo` as a starting string, we need to iterate over the letters `h`, `a`, and `l`. (We don't need to iterate over `o` since there are no substrings of at least 2 characters that start with `o`.)

Within the first loop, we need to iterate over the substrings that start at the given starting index. It's easiest to start with the substring of length 2, then the substring of length 3, and so on. The resulting loops look something like this:

```Ruby
# for each starting index from 0 through the next to last index position
	# for each substring length from 2 until there are no substrings of that length
		# extract the substring of the indicated length starting at the indicate index
	# end of inner loop
# end of outer loop
```
Beginning with the first letter of the string at index 0, `'h'`, we first find all of the substrings that begin with that letter: `['ha', 'hal', 'halo']`.  As  Ican see, we're showing the inner loop at work here:

- First, we get a 2-letter substring that begins at index 0: `'ha'`
- Next, we get a 3-letter substring that begins at index 0: `'hal'`
- Finally, we get a 4-letter substring that begins at index 0: `'halo'`

The loop, in this case, is one that starts with a length of 2 and ends with a length of 4.

Next, we need to find the substrings that start at index 1 (`a`). The loop, in this case, starts with a length of 2 and ends with a length of 3.

- First, we get a 2-letter substring that beings at index 1: `'al'`
- Next, we get a 3-letter substring that begins at index 1: `'alo'`

Finally, we get all of the substrings that begin at index 2. This time, the loop starts and ends with a length of 2, so there is only one iteration:

- We get a 2-letter substring that begins at index 2: `'lo'

What would happen if the original string was, say, 7 characters in length, such as `goalies`?  In that case, we'd still have to do through the same process - an outer loop that iterates from index - (the letter `'g'`) to index 5 (the letter `e`), and an inner loop that starts with a length of 2 and continues until there are not substrings of the desired length:

- On the first iteration of the outer loop, the substring length used in the inner loop ranges from 2 to 7.
- On the second iteration, the substring length ranges from 2 to 6.
- On the third iteration, the substring length ranges from 2 to 5.
- On the fourth iteration, the substring length ranges from 2 to 4.
- On the fifth iteration, the substring length ranges from 2 to 3.
- On the sixth, the substring length starts and ends at 2.

Looking at these two examples, we can determine that the outer loop iterates over indexes from 0 to the length of the next to the last position (e.g., `string.length - 2`). We can also see that the inner loop ranges from 2 to the original string length minus the starting index (`string.length - startingIndex`). We can use both of these facts in our algorithm.  Let's go ahead and write the complete algorithm for this method:
```Ruby
# - create an empty array called 'result' that will contain all required substrings
# - create a 'starting_index' variable (value '0') for the starting index of a substring
# - start a loop that iterates over 'starting_index' from '0' to the length of the string
	# - create a 'num_chars' variable (value '2') for the length of a substring
	# - start an inner loop that iterates over 'num_chars' from '2' to 'string.length - starting_index'
		# - extract a substring of length 'num_chars' from 'string' starting at 'starting_index'
		# - append the extracted substring to the 'result' array
		# - increment the 'num_chars' variable by '1'
	# - end the inner loop
	# - increment the 'starting_index' variable by '1'
# - end the outer loop
# - return the 'result' array
```

Since this pseudocode is relatively complex, I might decide to convert it to formal pseudocode as shown in the pseudo-code lesson 2. We might write the following formal pseudocode:

```Ruby
=begin
START

	/* Given a string named 'string' */

	SET result = []
	SET starting_index = 0

	WHILE starting_index <= length of string - 2
		SET numChars = 2
		WHILE numChars <= length of string - starting_index
			SET substring = num_chars characters from string starting at index starting_index
			append substring to result array
			SET num_chars = num_chars + 1

		SET starting_index = starting_index + 1
	RETURN result
END
=end
```

Formal pseudocode is an intermedicate step between the informal pseudocode shown above and the final program code shown below - it isn't always needed, but can sometimes be helpful. 

Here's some code that we might implement for the `substrings` method:

```Ruby
def substrings(str)
	result = []
	starting_index = 0;

	while (starting_index <= str.length - 2)
		num_chars = 2
		while (num_chars <= str.length - starting_index)
			substring = str.slice(starting_index, num_chars)
			result << substring
			num_chars + 1
		end
		starting_index += 1
	end
	result
end
```

Notice how similar it is to the formal pseudocode; that made writing the code straightforward. However, we could easily write this same code using the informal pseudocode with which we started.

Checking whether the string is a palindrome is easy enough. However, we can write a method for it to help make our code more readable. Let's include that method in our algorithm.
```Ruby
# - Inside the 'is_palindrome?' method, check whether the string value is equal to its reversed value. I can use the String#reverse method.

def is_palindrome?(str)
	return str == str.reverse
end
```

Here's the complete informal **pseudocode** for this problem:
```Ruby
=begin
input: a string
output: an array of substrings
rules: palindrome words should be case sensitive, meaning "abBA" is not a palindrome

Algorithm:
	substrings method
	=================
		- create an empty array called 'result' that will contain all required substring
		- create a 'starting_index' variable (value '0') for the starting index of a substring
		- start an inner loop that iterates over 'num_chars' from '2' to 'string.length - starting_index'
			- extract a substring of length 'num_chars' from 'string' starting at 'starting_index'
			- append the extracted substring to the 'result' array
			- increment the 'num_chars' variable by '1'
		- end the outer loop
		- return the 'result' array

	is_palindrome? method
	=====================
	- initialize a result variable to an empty array
	- create an array named substring_arr that contains all of the substrings of the input string that are at least 2 characters long.
	- loop through the words in the substring_arr array.
	- if the word is a palindrome, append it to the result array
	- return the result array
=end
	```

The code for this with all the helper methods:
```Ruby
def substrings(str)
	result = []
	starting_index = 0;

	while (starting_index <= str.length - 2)
		num_chars = 2
		while (num_chars <= str.length - starting_index)
			substring =  str.slice(starting_index, num_chars)
			result << substring
			num_chars += 1
		end
		starting_index += 1
	end
	result
end

def is_palindrome?(str)
	str == str.reverse
end

def palindrome_substrings(str)
	result = []
	substrings_arr = substrings(str)
	substrings_arr.each do |substring|
		result << substring if is_palindrome?(substring)
	end
	result
end

p palindrome_substrings("supercalifragilisticexpialidocious"); # ["il"]
p palindrome_substrings("abcddcbA"); # ["bcddcb", "cddc", "dd"]
p palindrome_substrings("palindrome"); # []
p palindrome_substrings("");           # []
```

Once again, we want to emphasize that I don't need to write all my pseudocode before I start coding. As I saw above, we wrote a high-level version of the `palindrome_substrings` pseudocode that omits the details of `substrings` and `is_palindrome?` methods. Afterwards, we wrote the corresponding code, and then returned to the two lower-level methods.

We also want to emphasize that I don't need the formal pseudocode step. I can use it if it helps me, but it is an extra step. 

Finally, the main takeaway is that I should be able to write a plain English solution to the problem. If I can't do that, I won't be able to code it either.  I also don't need any "fancy" methods to solve these problems. 

### Testing Frequently
Testing isn't properly part of the PEDAC approach, but it's an important step that I don't want to omit. Test my code early and often while writing it. For instance, consider the longer version of the `substrings` method that we wrote above. When we're writing this code, we might start with:
```Ruby
def substrings(str)
	result = []
	starting_index = 0
	num_chars = 2
end
```

At this point, I may want to check that the`slice` method works correctly and that the second argument should be the length of the substring.  To do that I cna use `puts` method to output the return value of the `slice` method.

```Ruby
def substrings(str)
	result = []
	starting_index = 0
	num_chars = 2
	str.slice(starting_index, num_chars)
end

substrings("abc") # "ab"
```

Next, add a bit more code and test again:
```Ruby
def substrings(str)
	result = []
	starting_index = 0
	num_chars = 2
	while starting_index <= str.length - 2
		p str.slice(starting_index, num_chars)
		starting_index += 1
	end
end

substrings("abc");

# Expected output:
# "ab"
# "bc"
```